This  is.  Okay. So  this  is  a  pretty  good  crowd  per  day  too. I'm  happy  to  see  you  guys. Hopefully,  it  will  continue  for  a  little  bit. Okay,  so  everything  should  be fine  for  all  of  the  recordings  now. Some  other  glitch  was  happening. So  all  these  should  be  recorded, which  is  obviously  very  important. Definitely  for  people  that  aren't  coming, but  also  even  if you're  coming  for  review,  et  cetera,  because  again, as  you're  going  to  see,  talking  to  me  and  going  to discussion  sessions  and  talking  to  any  of  the  IAs, which  you're  going  to  set  up  office  hours. Who've  taken  my  course. Again,  especially  my  exams,  what  I  want  you  to  learn, which  should  be  reflected  on  my  exams  are really  what  I'm  emphasizing  in  class, what  I  am  sorting  to  draw  on  the  board  over and  over  that  might  match  parts  of  the  PowerPoint. Again,  there's  a  lot  of  slides  on the  PowerPoint  that  I  use  as a  background  that  if  I'm not  talking  about  it  and  specifically  looking  at  it, it's  probably  not  covered  on  the  test, if  you're  not  sure  on  some  things  on  that  because  I  do have  more  PowerPoint  slides  than  that, you  could  simply  ask  me,  ask  them, and  we  will  tell  you,  no, that's  not  on  the  test  or  this  is  what's  on  the  test. I'm  trying  not  to  really  fool  anybody  of  anything. I  know  what  I  want  you  to  learn. That's  why  I  don't  really  have  you  read too  much  extra  stuff  unless  I  assign a  paper  because  I  really  want  you  to  focus on  these  main  concepts  that I'm  trying  to  present  for  this  course. With  that  said,  Well, first  of  all,  with  that  said,  maybe you  guys  will  start  talking  as  it  goes  too. Are  there  any  outstanding  questions  about  anything logistic  or  anything  else  that people  want  to  address  at  all? The  main  thing  we'll  be  starting as  I've  writ  on  cell  signaling, which  leads  us  to actually  oncogenes  and  tumor  suppressors. I'm  going  to  get  to  that  really  in  a  minute, starting  with  the  hallmarks  of  cancer, looking  again  at  the  major  genetic  and  other  type of  mutations  that basically  take  a  normal  cell  and transform  it  into  a  potentially  malignant  cancer  cell, everything  that's  involved  in  that. Because  remember,  a  cancer  is really  coming  from  generally  one  cell. Acquires  several  different  mutations,  epigenetic  changes, as  well  as  genetic  and  then  creates  this  idea  of  becoming uncontrolled  proliferation  and  the  ability to  metastasize,  et  cetera. This  will  be  a  classic  idea  of the  hallmarks  and  new  hallmarks  here  as  well. And  then  we  will  get  today and  this  would  be  a  summary  of  this. We're  going  to  have  to  learn  two  signaling  pathways. That's  all  we  have  learned and  just  certain  elements  of  it, that  are  important  because  when  we  start  talking about  the  genetic  mutations,  oncogenes, especially  in  tumor  suppressors, we're  going  to  refer  to  a  couple  of  these  ones  in particular  to  talk  about  these being  sort  of  mutated  directly  in  cancer. Then  as  we  get  into  the  following  lecture, we  start  talking  about  then  the  therapeutics, which  are  against  each  of  these  abnormal  genes. Why  ultimately  is  going  to  I'll  be  writing  this  a  lot. This  is  going  to  be  a  framework  a lot  for  as  I  talk  about  again, this  is  what  I'm  trying  to  do  throughout  the  course, talk  about  the  mutations  that  are  going to  happen  and  then  what  is our  current  therapeutic  potential  therapeutics that  we're  trying  to  attack  this? That's  why  ultimately  this  will start  to  get  filled  in  as  we  go, talking  about  the  therapeutic  that's  involved. Then  again,  if  you  want  to  call  to memorization,  call  to  memorization. But  to  me,  it's  really  again, understanding  the  framework  of  things. Again,  if  you're  going  to,  you  know,  fix  a  car. You  need  to  know  the  parts, you  need  to  know  what  might  be  broken, diagnose  it,  and  then come  up  with  the  potential  solution. There's  a  little  more  of  this  type  of  memorization. But  again,  if  you've  had  cell  biology wor  how  many  people  have  had  to  memorize every  step  of  glycolysis and  Krebs  cycle  and  draw  structures. This  isn't  going  to  be  that  bad,  I  promise  you. We're  not  doing  that  to  start  with. What  I  want  to  start  with  is  just  a  couple  of  things from  the  introduction  that  I  do want  to  cover  that  I  didn't  cover  last  time. And  really  only  one  main  thing  when  it  comes  down  to  it. First  of  all,  again, I'm  not  going  to  redraw  my  chart, although  we  can  do  it  for  office  hours  too. Again,  the  chart  that  I  drew  last  time  talking about  I  we'll  go  back  a  second. Looking  at  this,  but  you're  not  memorizing  that  chart, but  we  did  talk  about  looking  at  TNM  staging. I  drew  a  chart  to  go  in  general  how  you  might  look at  the  score  and  how  to  basically  stage  stage  one, two,  or  three,  and  four  to  give  us  that  overview. I  just  wanted  to  show  you, not  memorizing,  but  showing  you  again  in  a  real  case, every  cancer  is  using this  criteria  a  little  bit  differently  and  this  was sort  of  a  cool  picture came  from  one  of  my  cancer  books  that gives  for  pancreatic  cancer the  criteria  that  they  use  for  these  different  stagings. That's  where  you  can  actually  see  things  like  stage Eero  but  also  subdivisions of  some  of  these  stages  as  well. What's  nice  is  just  so  you  realize  that  instead  of my  general  characteristics  that  I  was  giving  because that's  what  I  want  to  can  see  for  any  vigial  cancer, they're  defining  things  very  specifically  as far  as  how  localized  the  cancer is  within  the  tumor  and  how  far  has spread  even  locally  within the  tissue  and  then  potentially  the  lymph  nodes. You  can  see  specific  they're  much  more specific  on  it  than definitely  we're  going  to  be  in  the  course. But  we're  going  to  be  looking  at  that  general  scheme. No  memorization.  This  is  just for  visualization  of  what  I'm  trying  to  say. Now,  again,  I  don't  have  for  this  course just  because  of  the  ten  week  and  what I  do  want  to  get  you  to  the  next  level, I'm  not  going  to  go  as  much  as  I  would  into the  causes  and  basically  of cancer  or  some  of  the  causes  of  it. You  can  look  at  this  general  idea  though  and really  start  seeing  the  idea  that  hereditary  does  matter, and  there's  a  few  cancers that  we  will  talk  about  that  are  definitely identified  by  a  particular  genetic  mutation in  a  gene  like  Baca  one, Bacha  two,  that  are  associated with  high  levels  of  cancer. But  the  idea  when  you're  looking  at this  more  as  we  get  to  this, especially  you  guys  in  the  century, we  realize  that  your susceptibility  to  some  of  these  various  things, including  radiation, things  from  tobacco  smoke  or  even  alcohol, which  is  big  in  the  news  now, things  like  that  are  going  to  be determined  by  your  whole  genetic  profile,  looking  at  all, 12,000,  19,000  genes  and how  they're  expressed  to  different  things  like  that, that  makes  everyone  individual. Really  looking  susceptibility  to cancer  has  to  be  looking  at  your  whole  genomic  profile. And  that  obviously  is  becoming  more  and  more  in  place. But  again,  what  I  love  this  too, is  what  you  have  to  be  careful  are because  it's  becoming  more  and  it  will  be  more  developed, there's  a  lot  of  companies  out  there  that  say, Hey,  we've  got  this  figured  out, send  us  $1,000  in  your  spit  and  we'll  tell  you exactly  your  chances  of getting  pancreatic  cancer  or  things  like  that, such  as  companies  like  23  and  me. I  kind  of  ragging  on  23  and  me  for  more  than  a  decade, their  science  that  they  claim to  have  is  really  not  that  valid. There  might  be  some  validity  to  it, but  it  really  is  not  that  valid. In  fact,  I  have  a  video  for, I  forgot  the  guy's  name,  but  he  was  ahead  of  NIH. He  sent  his  DNA  to  three  companies. One  company  said  he  had  a  greater than  normal  chance  of  getting  pancreatic  cancer. Another  company  said  he  had  less  than  normal  population. And  luckily  23  and  me, I've  been  waiting  for  them  to  fall. They're  falling  now. Because  again,  the  people in  charge  aren't  even  scientists. I'm  not  saying  genetic  testing, some  of  it  that  exists  can  be  very  helpful  and not  saying  that  eventually  as we  go  and  maybe  you  will  be  part  of  the  development, as  we  really  get  into  the  science  of  looking at  these  interactions  and  looking  at  genomic  profiles, this  will  be  very  useful  for potentially  seeing  your  relative  risk  of exposure  and  of  getting  cancer  and  then  coming up  again  with  specific  potentially  preventative, but  also  diagnostic  and  treatments  as  well. This  idea  of  personalized  genomics  is  coming  into  play. It's  just  that  the  commercial  element  of  it  might be  a  little  further  than  the  actual  reality. I  was  happy  about  23.  Okay. I'm  really  not  going  into  this  except  for  this, I'll  show  this  because  it's  important. You're  not  memorizing  these  numbers. But  when  you're  looking,  it's  a  good  slide  for this  that  most  cancers  in  general, if  you're  looking  at  statistics are  not  happening  with  younger  people, it's  happening  with  age. The  two  bullet  points  I  do  put  up  there. And  when  it  comes  down  to  it, is  we're  going  to  see  again, we  have  a  lot  of  safeguards  within  ourselves. One  mutation  it's  not  like some  diseases  in  which  you  have  potential  disease. It's  going  to  take  many  different  mutations. Again,  either  genetic,  apogenetic  et  cetera, that  we're  going  to  talk about  as  the  hallmarks  of  cancer. It's  takes  time  to  have  that  happen. So  you  are  exposed. We're  going  to  briefly  talk  about  carcinogens. All  of  these  things  which  increase your  likelihood  of  having  cancer,  the  longer  you  live. Obviously,  the  higher  the  exposure. It  makes  sense  cancer  with  age. That's  why  this  came  from  some  book. I  actually  just  put  this  up. You're  not  memorizing  any  of  these  numbers, but  you  can  really  see  for  you  guys, you're  not  even  on  the  chart, you  have  a  happy  couple  of  years  here. But  as  you  get  older,  increases. When  I  look  at  this  one  too,  prostate  cancer, when  I  started  teaching,  I  was  here,  I  wasn't  here. But  then  there  was  that  idea  of  shit, I  turned  60  at  some  point. Lo  whenever  you  have  a  broken  line, it's  really  bad  or  something. Basically,  now  today  again,  I  am  65. They  don't  even  put  you  past  this  in  a  way, but  it's  a  little  scarier. A  little  scarier  when  you're  on  that  side  of  things. For  a  while  I  was  looking  up  here. Again,  you  guys  aren't  even  anywhere  on  the  chart, but  you  know  people  that  are. I  memorizing  that  and  really  not  memorizing  this, except  for  this  idea, and  this  is  just  a  notation. Again,  I'm  always  going  to  tell  you, this  is  what  you  have  to  know  because  I  know a  lot  of  this  is  just  getting  us  oriented. But  when  you  start  talking  about the  things  which  are  reported  to  cause  cancer, you  really  have  to  look at  two  things  and  really  even  more  than  that. You  know,  there  are  these epidemiology  studies  in  which  they  look  at populations  and  look  at  exposure  to  various  things and  try  to  come  up  with  conclusions that  are  really  correlations. They're  not  showing  cause  and  effect. Even  something  like  this,  which  basically correlated  the  incidence  of smoking  to  lung  cancer  deaths. Okay?  It  increased  during smoking  20  years  later,  it  takes  a  while. Then  as  we  started  to  become more  educated  and  less  people  are  smoking, especially  in  places  like  here, the  cancer  rates  did  go  down. A  real  correlation  happened. Does  that  mean  that  cigarette  consumption  caused  cancer? Actually,  no,  but  there  is  a  correlation. Now  on  these  studies,  by  the  way, again,  I'm  not  going  to  do  it  in  this  class  as  much. I  do  it  for  non  majors. Just  because  you  hear  a  study  on the  news  that  came  from  some  lab  or  something  else, doesn't  mean  this  is  even  that  valid. You  need  to  really  look  how controlled  were  these  studies? When  they're  looking  at  populations  and they're  looking  at  this,  I  don't  know, alcohol,  were  all  the  other  variables  the  same? When  you're  looking  at  variable  alcohol  use, what  was  the  family  history  in  genetics? How  much  food  did  they  eat? Were  they  obese?  Were  they  exposed? All  that  really  has  to  be  taken out  if  you're  looking  for  one  variable. And  that's  why  you  have  to be  careful  and  that's  where  lay  people. Again,  if  you  just  hear  something  on  the  news, I  wouldn't  necessarily  trust  it.  I'd  tell  anybody. I  say,  trust  no  one  when  you're  hearing  this,  okay? Do  you  trust  me?  Answer  is  no,  you  already  have  that. That'll  be  a  question  on  the  test. I'll  wear  a  shirt.  Someone  gave  me  a  shirt  saying  it. Trust  no  one,  even  me. You  want  to  look  up  yourself. Let's  say  alcohol  now  they're  talking  about  putting it  on  alcohol  that  it  may  cause  cancer. Actually,  anything  may  cause  cancer,  by  the  way. But  the  idea  is  that  going  to  be  really  something  valid? When  they  say  these  studies,  what  are  they  talking  about? Are  they  talking  about  a  drink every  two  weeks  for  everybody? Are  they  talking  about  basically looking  at  people  for  three  weeks, or  people  that  report  this  or  three drinks  tore  et  cetera Because  I  started  looking  at  some  of  these  studies. Again,  I'm  not  saying  one  thing  or  the  other, but  I'm  saying  sometimes  what's reported  is  over  reported and  you  really  if  you  care  about  this, let's  say  you  like  to  have  a  beer once  in  a  while,  now  you're  afraid, you  might  want  to  look  at  these  studies  more  closely before  you  change  your  lifestyle  and  make  that  condition. I'm  not  advocating  the  use  of  alcohol. But  I  was  looking  further  into  some  of  that  information. I  was  interesting,  but  not  for  this  course. The  other  aspect  and  then  we'll talk  about  the  one  thing  I  want  you  to  know  is really  to  show  something  is a  cancer  causing  agent.  You  need  both. You  need  epidemiological  studies  to  show  a  correlation, but  then  you  have  to  get  in more  controlled  laboratory  studies  in which  you're  looking  more specifically  at the  particular  reagents  and  what  you're  talking  about, and  do  they  in  controlled  situation, are  they  carcinogenic  in  things like  cancer  cells  and  animal  models,  et  cetera. Then  you  have  a  much  more  controlled and  you  need  both  because  sometimes you'll  see  things  in  laboratory that  seem  to  indicate  cancer. But  really,  again, even  though  we  like  to  use  mice,  mice  aren't  people, genetics  might  be  different, and  their  exposure  is  usually this  high  dose  that  we  might  not  be  exposed  to. So  you  have  to  take  both  those  into  consideration. Whenever  you're  hearing  something  or talking  about  something  that  they're  saying, causes  cancer  and  you  need  to  take  it  out  of  your  life, you  really  need  to  look  at  both  of  those  things  and then  sort  of  make  your  judgment.  Okay? So  that's  that.  So  what  I  really want  and  this  is  why  you'll  see  it  on  this, I  really  wanted  to  get  this  idea  of generalized  carcinogens  and  really  start  defining, I  already  mentioned  it,  the  idea of  a  carcinogen  by  definition, any  cancer  causing  agent. But  you  can  start  classifying, although  there's  all  these  things  which are  a  combination  of  carcinogens, which  are  mutagens  versus  promoters. That's  why  promoters  are really  important  to  think  about  here. Again,  I  have  that  up  there, carcinogen  any  cancer  causing. But  then  you  have  mutagens  which  directly  mutate  DNA. Okay.  Some  of  those  things  in  the  previous  slide, polonium  210  or  something  that's  in  tobacco  tarts, et  cetera  In  laboratory, et  cetera,  they're  shown  to  directly  mutate  the  DNA. They're  mutagens.  UV  radiation  as  well. They  directly  mutate. But  what  I  want  to  say  more  interesting. But  the  other  aspect  is  our  carcinogens, they  increase  the  likelihood  of cancer,  but  they're  promoters. In  general,  they  do  not  cause  the  mutations, but  they're  going  to  create  the  environmental  conditions, cellular  conditions,  which  increase the  likelihood  of  cancer  developing. That's  where  actually, I  actually  will  show  this  table  here. But  that's  where  alcohol  definitely  is  shown  to  be, it  is  a  carcinogen  like  most  lings  are, but  also  hormones  as  well. This  is  an  interesting  list  that  we're  not  memorizing, of  course,  but  we're  looking  at. This  comes  from  Weinberg, what  I  call  the  Big  Book  of cancer  because  it's  very  thorough, so  it  gives  a  lot  of  information. But  it  really  here  just  gets  this  idea  and  I  put overall  the  idea  that  what  are  some  of  these  promoters, we  looked  at  the  hormones  that  are up  we  can  look  at  some  of  these  other  things, even  something  like  acid  reflux  or  chronic  inflammation. I  can't  even  put  that  things  like  that,  ulcers. Now,  these  aren't  directly causing  cancer,  but  what  are  they  doing? These  various  things  do  things  cancer  cells  will  exploit. They're  increasing  proliferation. We'll  talk  about  inflammation, basically  response  to  infection, cell  damage,  all  of  those  things which  are  obviously  naturally  occurring. We're  going  to  be  putting  molecules,  et  cetera, changing  our  cellular  conditions to  help  those  conditions. Cancer  cells  saying,  I  can  use  that. They  start  exploiting  that  and  that increases  the  likelihood  of  those  things  happening. That's  why  these  would  consider basically  what  you  might  consider  promoters. Again,  these  are  natural  things  that  we  want  to  have. We  want  to  have  these  abilities  to  fight infection  and  to  deal  with  inflammation,  et  cetera. But  the  fact  of  this  is cancer  cells  will  exploit  these and  all  these  overtime  are  promoters. Okay.  But  that's  why  too. Again,  we  know  breast  cancer, prostate  cancer  are  the  most  likelihood. You  can  go  right  now  out  and  take  all  of  your  hormones away  all  your  sex  hormones  to  decrease  those  chances, but  is  that  worth  it  to  your  lifestyle? That's  where  you're  sorting  making  choices. For  me,  obesity,  there's a  lot  of  molecules  put  out  there. To  me,  that's  a  clear  Uh,  again,  I'm  biased, but  I  feel  obesity  is very  clear  in  the  science  when  you  start  looking  at  it, that  it  increases  the  likelihood of  a  lot  of  these  cancers. Obviously,  UV  ration.  But  smoking, well,  let's  just  say  for  sure, tobacco  products,  the  use  of  tobacco  products. You  saw  the  list  of  some  of  those  things. That's  definitely  linked. You  could  basically  take  that  out,  et  cetera. Now,  as  far  as,  you  know, the  use  of  marijuana  smoking,  it's  legal  now, how  much  of  that  is,  that's  still kind  of  we're  looking  at  some  of  those  studies. In  fact,  if  you  look  in  the  laboratory, THC  itself  has  been  shown  potentially  to  decrease, at  least  in  the  laboratory  setting, different  types  of  cancer  effects  on  cells  as  well. They  don't  report  that  as  much. That's  where  you  have  to  be  careful. But  definitely  to  me,  obesity,  exercise, even  independent  of  their  studies, even  independent  of  obesity. If  you're  not  obese  and  you  exercise  versus  not, that's  shown  to  decrease  cancer  too. So  simple  things  I  agree  or  at  least I  think  might  be  worth looking  at  and  trying  to  change  your  lifestyle. Some  of  these  other  things,  we'll  see. But  that's  the  key. Again,  mutagens  versus  promoters, here  are  some  of  the  examples  of  but  here  is the  last  slide  I  want  to  get  to  this  because it  is  it's  showing  this  basic  thing. Mutagens  promoters,  again,  I put  some  of  those  idea  of  how  it  is, but  they  work  which  makes sense  in  a  synergistic  manner  here, where  they're  not  independent, they're  not  just  additive. This  was,  again,  a  simplified  but  a  true  one, looking  at  the  risk  of  these  types  of  cancer. I  never  can  say  this  out  overall properly  and  the  relative  risk. They're  looking  basically  at  the  combination  of mutagens  and  basically  promoters,  alcohol,  and  smoking. So  in  some  of  these  studies,  they're looking  again  at  these  non  drinker, non  smokers,  Mormons  or  whatever  they  are. Relatively  I  know  it's  bad. That's  a  joke,  guys.  If  your  Mormons,  You  guys  are  cool. I  don't  want  to  insult  anybody. I  mean,  I  mean,  that's  fine. But  anyway,  it's  that  if  you  heavy  drinker, however,  that  was  defined  in  this  study. But  you  don't  smoke,  that  increases  the  likelihood. Again,  the  opposite,  increased  likelihood. But  what  if  you  do  both  in  some  of  these  studies? This  isn't  just  additive, it's  50  times  more  than  any  individual. I  should  make  some  sense, and  this  is  where  when  you're  starting to  see  how  these  things  combined, if  you  are  drinking  and  just looking  at  esophago  et  cetera, you  are  destroying  some  cells. That's  just  a  natural  thing  that  alcohol  will  do. But  at  that  same  time, if  you're  throwing  polonium 210  and  all  those  carcinogens  on, again,  as  you  destroy  cells, that  promotes  new  cell  development. That's  where  DNA  replication  is going  to  happen  to  replace  those  cells. If  at  the  same  time  you're  throwing  mutagens  on, it  makes  sense  that  that  would  greatly increase  the  likelihood  of  those  mutations  happening. It  makes  sense  in  that  idea. That's  usually  the  example  that  I  give. Again,  the  interesting  thing  with  that, especially  around  here  or  anywhere  else, that  a  lot  of  people  don't  smoke. They  don't  use  tobacco  products  except  maybe  when they  go  to  some  bars  and  start drinking  because  that's almost  a  social  type  of  thing  too, that's  probably  not  a  great  time  to  be  doing  that. I've  had  students  take  this  to bars  and  actually  show  them  this  and  like, Are  you  going  to  stop  doing  this  now? They're  like,  Anyway. That's  really  the  main  thing  I  wanted  to  get  out  of this  last  intro  chapter  here, and  this  is  what  I  want  you  to  know,  realizing, really  introducing  a  lot of  this  idea  of  what  we're  going  to  talk  about promoters  just  increasing this  micro  environment  to  promote  cancer, but  also  to  see  how  it  makes sense  that  these  things would  work  together  in  that  sense. So  let's  get  to  a  little  nitty  gritty, but  not  too  bad  at  the  beginning. All  right.  You'll  see  this  a  lot. I'll  put  this  up  a  lot  as  we  go  through, especially  the  first  half  of  the  course. Again,  hallmarks  of  cancer,  in  fact,  I  have  T  shirts. I'll  try  to  wear  these  two  that  show  it. This  is  again,  some  of the  signaling  pathways  that  some  of  you  have  learned, et  cetera,  overall,  and some  of  the  important  molecules  are  involved. We're  not,  of  course,  memorizing  all  of  this. But  the  idea,  these  are pathways  which  are  controlling  in  this  case, look  at  that  cell  division,  proper  cell  depth. Really  response  to  various  stimuli  and  toxic  events. You've  seen  these  overall  for  different  things. Now,  the  idea  of  why  it's  important for  this  is  showing  a  couple  of  things. First  of  all,  the  fact  and  we'll  see  this, the  fact  that  we  have  these  multiple pathways  and  some  of  them are  redundant  and  basically additive  means  this  is  our  safeguards. This  is  this  idea  that  we  want  to  have proper  control  over a  growth  basic  increasing  cell  division, decreasing  cell  division,  life  versus  death, we  want  to  have  a  lot  of  control. The  idea  is  we  don't  want  just  one  circuit. We  don't  want  it  where  if  one  thing  breaks, the  whole  thing  comes  apart. We  want  this  idea  if  one  pathway  is  not  working  properly, potentially  for  various  reasons, we're  going  to  have  another  pathway  take over  and  basically  counter  it. We  have  that  built  in  safeguards. This  is  the  schematic  of  how  not  to  get  disease, of  how  not  to  get  cancer. So  the  idea  is  cancer needs  to  figure  out  a  way  to  circumvent  this. They  know  that  basically one  mutation  won't  do  it because  something  else  will  take  over. You  have  to  break  key  elements  of  this  to turn  your  nice  controlled  cell  into  a  cancer  cell. So  it  takes  multiple  basically  mutations over  multiple  pathways. And  that's  where  the  ones  in  red  showing  this. These  are  the  mutations  which  have high  numbers  as  far  as population  of  found  in  cancer  patients. That  doesn't  mean  that  all  the  ones  in  black, you  don't  find  those  mutations  in  cancer  patients, but  the  ones  that  are  in  red,  including  RAS, MI,  P  53,  RB, some  of  the  things  we're  going  to specifically  talk  about  in  this  course, these  are  the  ones  which  are  most  likely. You  can  see  this  just  you  guys  are  now  young, developing  cancer  cells  and  what  you're  looking  at  this, you  can  see  you  can't  break  everything. But  if  you're  looking  at  the  schematic  and  you look  at  something  like  RS,  I  mean, Rs  obviously  interact  between  seven  or  eight  pathways, instead  of  trying  to  break  all  of  these  individually, Hey,  you  throw  RS  out. You've  knocked  out  this  whole  control  element, potentially  that  whole  side. Same  thing  with  this  poor  guy  over  here,  P  53, like  a  boring  name, basically  controls  potentially  half  of  this. That's  why  we'll  talk  about  P  53. Most  cancers  definitely  get  rid  of this  basically  we'll  talk tumors  because  it  is  so  important. That's  where  this  idea  and  what  we're  going  to get  to  in  this  general  idea  what  you  have  to  break, you  have  to  have  different  types  of  mutations, even  though  they  might be  varying  whether  you're taking  one  of  this  pathway  or  the  other, different  characteristics  of  taking a  normal  controlled  cell  and  making  it so  now  it  is  a  malignant,  dangerous  cancer  cell. So  we'll  see  this  a  lot. The  first  thing  I'll  do  will  be  sort  of  just  to introduce  us  or  reintroduce this  idea  of  these  various  things. There  have  been  papers,  that  I'll  put  up, you  don't  have  to  read,  called  hallmarks  of  cancer, and  then  there's  the  new  hallmarks  of  cancer. I  think  there  might  be  another  one,  even  the  newer  ones. But,  you  know,  it's  a  generalized  idea  of  some  of the  main  things  that  have  to  happen as  far  as  going  from  a  normal  cell  to  cancer. Okay.  How  many  people  may  have  had cell  biology  or  even general  talked  about  the  hallmarks  of  cancer. Definitely,  if  you  took  my  build  one  years  ago, actually  I  put  cancer  in  every  course. Even  biochemical  techniques  now, I  can  actually  do  it  because  we'll  talk  about  this  today. We'll  talk  about  glycolysis, changing  for  cells,  basically  cancer  cells. I  get  to  put  that  in  actually how  many  people  have  taken  biochemical  techniques? Okay.  Have  you  guys  done  it recently  where  we  do  the  drosophila, the  fled  ones  in  which  we get  them  drunk  and  then  crush  them  up? Well,  now  some  of  the  stuff coming  out  about  alcohol  that  I'm  looking  at, some  of  the  mechanisms  do  involve  alcohol  metabolism, and  we're  talking  about  those  genes. So  it's  cool,  so  I  can  actually  put a  little  bit  in  for people  that  are  in  the  course  this  year. Anyway,  that's  another  story.  Heartbrks  of  cancer. Again,  you'll  see  how much  you're  memorizing,  so  to  speak. But  the  original  paper, and  I  have  a  little  video  that's just  not  working  on  this  that  you  can  look  at  too. The  original  paper,  which  is of  I  don't  know,  15-years-old. Again,  by  Weinberg  eta, they  started  looking  at  these  three  major  things which  were  the  original  six  hallmarks  that  have to  actually  happen  to  that normally  is  associated  with going  from  a  normal  cell  to  cancer  cell. It  has  basically  these  types  of  words  involved, but  also  this  idea of  and  I'm  going  to  illustrate  it  here, what  this  actually  means  when  we're thinking  about  how  we're  studying  it.  Okay. If  you  just  look  at  this  now before  I  actually  throw  it  out  here, it  is  this  idea  of  where  we're  going  to introduce  aca  genes  and  tumor  suppressors. I'm  going  to  show  it  on  that  big  chart  too. But  here  we  talk  about  here  cell  death, which  will  make  sure  we  talk  about  apoptosis. Here's  gaining  a  blood  supply, angiogenesis,  different  things  like  that,  metastasis. We'll  just  look  at  this  a  little  bit  closer, just  with  a  couple  of  lines  here  just  to  define  this. When  we  talk  about  the  course  itself  here, we're  going  to  gain  on  this  first  test, a  lot  about  ca  genes  and  tumor  suppressor. The  second  test,  going  further  on, we're  going  to  be  talking  a  lot  about the  loss  of  the  ability  to  kill  the  cell, gaining  this  blood  supply, and  metastasis,  et  cetera. Won't  talk  too  much  about  this  in this  course  because  I  don't  have  too  much  time. A  lot  of  this  course  will  be delving  into  these  hallmarks, understanding  the  mechanisms,  and  then understanding  how  we  are  fighting  them. I  want  to  show  this  again, complicated  thing,  but  they  did  from  that  other  chart  is, let's  have  about  the  general  idea  of  taking  again, all  these  very  complicated  specifics  and looking  at  generally  what  has  to happen  for  cancer  to  happen. They  take  some  of  these  molecules, we'll  talk  about  some  of  these  later  too. But  yeah,  there  is  this  idea  of  metastasis. These  cells  have  to  acquire  or reacquire  the  ability  to  migrate. There's  certain  molecules  involved  in  that. We'll  talk  a  little  about  that  later. There's  also  this  idea  that  I put  this  idea  of  proliferation This  is  what  will  happen  to those  cells  normally  of  differentiating, becoming  where  they  come  out  of  the  cell  cycle, become  senasent  are  potentially  then  even  dying. That's  the  idea.  Again,  cancer  is  going  to  break these  things  so  that  you  mainly  are  proliferating. Then  there  is  more  this  idea of  we  have  a  natural  ability, even  normal  cells, especially  eno  damage  to  kill  it  by  apoptosis. This  is  the  idea  they  have  to  break  that  mechanism, so  you  basically  limit the  chance  of  getting  rid  of  this  mutated  cell, and  so  it's  a  loss  of apoptosis  and  increase  in  survival  signals. When  you  go  back  to  let's  go  go  back  to  this, it's  taking  this  whole  idea  of all  this  complexity  and breaking  it  up  into  some  of  the  major  things  that  happen. You  want  to  increase  proliferation,  decrease  cell  death, increase  motility  by  mutating particular  ones  of  these  things. No  real  big  deal  here. Next  time  I'm  going  to  talk  more  about  this, this  slide  will  be  up  again before  I  start  doing  the  hallmarks. But  when  we  talk  about  ocagenes  and  tumor  suppressors, these  are  some  of  the  major  mutations and  we'll  put  it  up  here  too. There  will  be  a  couple  of  characteristics  and we'll  see  this  today  as  well  in  which  you  have, again  normal  genes,  they're  called protocogenes  that  are  involved  in  self  signaling. Unfortunately,  that's  a  bad  name because  it  makes  it  seem  bad. But  the  idea  of  mutations  will  convert  it  to  the  ocagene. Then  we'll  show  exactly we'll  put  this  up  here  what  that  actually  is. But  it  is  showing  that  it's  considered dominant  because  everyone  knows now  we  have  two  copies  of  every  gene. In  this  case,  only  one  of  the  copies  has  to mutate  for  you  actually  to  see  the  effect. We'll  put  that  up.  The  tumor  suppressors,  again,  again, this  was  an  example  of showing  this  that  we're  going  to  be illustrating  here  of  showing  that  this is  a  positive  growth  pathway  in  which  we go  and  you  probably  have  had  this  RAS  map  kinase that  when  you  actually  are  stimulated  to  this  cell  cycle, you  basically  will  be activating  this  and  then  inactivating. Clearly,  getting  that  RAS  stuck  would  make  sense. Tom  suppressors  are  the  opposite  in  a  sense. They  are  the  breaks  of  the  system. In  this  case,  the  idea  you  could  lose one  break  and  the  other might  be  okay,  you  won't  see  the  effect. You  have  to  lose  both  considered  recessive. I'm  going  to  go  over these  the  next  few  weeks  as  I  look  at  it. Okay.  We'll  talk  about  P  53  overall. Actually,  this  is  since  I  don't  show the  video  where  I  do  want  to actually  put  the  hallmarks  up  and  put  it. So  the  first  hallmark  does relate  when  you  look  at the  other  slide  to  this  idea  of  aca  genes. You  basically  are  going  to  consider  it  a gain  of  function,  it's  the  gain, it's  conversion,  but  the  gain  of  this  idea  of  no  gene. Oncogene. With  this,  there's  a  car  analogy  that  you used  for  these  first  three  ones  that  makes  sense. The  video  clip  showed  it  this  wasn't  showing  this  idea. Again,  the  idea  of  these  signaling  pathways, such  as  where  is  to  keep  doing  it. Such  as  the  one  shown  here  for  the  RAS  map  kinase, it  is  this  idea  that are  basically  when  we  should  be stimulated  to  replace  cells  or  to  proliferate, you're  going  to  have  a  pathway  like  this  pathway, the  RAS  map  kinase  pathway  in  which  an external  signal,  some  growth  factor, et  cetera,  are  going  to  simulate  the  cell  to  go  through this  process  to  actually  proliferate  to  bitosis. But  the  idea  of  this  is  these  molecules  get  turned  on, and  then  turned  off. You  don't  keep  proliferating, it  basically  is  basically accelerator  going  on  and  put  off. A  lot  of  times  the  idea  of  the  system  is  that a  gain  of  one  of  these  oncogenes  such  as RAS  is  like  a  stuck  accelerator. And  again,  a  good  example  of  this  that  we  will cover  starting  probably  next  where  are  we  on? Monday,  Tuesday,  Thursday,  probably  next  Tuesday. We'll  be  an  example  being  RAS. We  have  a  stuck  accelerator. Now,  the  idea  is  if  you're  in  a  car, let's  say  you  got  a  stuck  accelerator  you're  going, do  we  have  a  system  in  a  car  to  stop  it? Well,  brakes. Same  way  here.  We  have  something to  counter  these  positive  growth  signals, basically  negative  type  growth  signals. In  fact,  here  they  call  them anti  growth,  there's  TGF  Beta, going  through  a  similar  pathway  and  the  idea, these  are  the  brakes.  That's  the  idea. Even  if  we  have  a  little  more  acceleration, what's  naturally  going  to  happen  in  our  cell, we're  going  to  increase  our  brakes. Everything  has  a  balance. Does  cancer  like  those  brakes? No,  it  has  to  break  the  break,  so  to  speak. You're  talking  about  now  not  a  gain, but  the  loss  and  these  are  generally called  tumor  suppressors,  which  makes  sense. Their  expression  decreases  the  chance  of  tumor  formation. While  this  is  a  gain of  something  and  something  like  a  stuck  accelerator, this  is  going  to  be  the  loss  of  function. It's  a  loss  of  this  class  of proteins  that  are  going  to  be  called  tumor  suppressors. Carnology  that's  cutting  the  break. Now,  one  of  the  big  molecules  that we  will  talk  about  even  in  this  section, and  I  think  that's  where  you can  see  the  terminology  there  as  well. What  are  the  ones  I'll  be  talking  about a  lot  we'll  be  these  guys  here, but  P  53,  again, being  one  of  the  main  ones  here. P  53  is  really  one  of the  control  elements  of  this  whole  sort  of  section  here, which  is  sort  of  the  brake  system  here. Now,  we'll  talk  about  some  of  these  others  are  important, too,  that  they  mutations might  again  be  cutting  the  brakes. But  this  one  will  cut  a  lot  of  these  brakes and  we'll  come  back  to  actually how  it  affects  this  as  well. Okay?  But  I'll  put  if  you  want  an  example. Again,  this  will  be  pretty  easy. Because  we're  going  to  be  talking  about  this  again, but  the  loss  of  P  53  is  a  big  one. The  third  hallmark,  and  again, these  are  not  in  a  particular  order necessarily  of  happening. The  third  hallmark  that's  not  really  shown, potentially  that  much  on  this  chart  here  is  the  fact, again,  you  have  a  stuck  accelerator,  you  cut  the  brakes. Your  car  is  going  and  going. Will  that  go  on  forever? Probably  not.  What  are  you  going  to  do? You're  going  to  run  out  of  gas? I  guess  now  electricity. I  got  to  get  into  this  century  or  something  like  that. But  the  idea,  we  have  that  system. This  is  this  idea  and just  showing  this  up  here  in  a  couple  of  slides. Most  of  you,  again,  have  had,  you  know,  molecular, et  cetera,  even  in  general, you  know  this  idea  of  DNA  replication,  AR  chromosomes. Because  they're  linear,  the  idea  is  each  cell  division, they  get  a  little  shorter. We  don't  want  to  lose  our  particular  genes, and  so  we  have  an  enzyme  called  talomse that  puts  these  repeating  units  called  teamers  on. Again,  just  showing  this  general  idea. The  idea  is  you  have  a  timer, as  far  as  how  many  cell  divisions  you  can have  before  you  reach  this  critical  element if  you  do  not  keep  putting  telomeres  on  when  you get  near  the  actual  genes, you've  lost  your  telomeres  and  that  usually  will signal  then  definitely  no  more  cell  division, Senasin  or  also  might  actually  stimulate  apoptosis. We  have  again  this  limited  idea how  many  cell  divisions  you  can  have. Now,  early  on  in  development,  again, let's  go  back  to  your  little  bun  blastila  stage. Again,  we  didn't  want  just  20  or  30  divisions. We  needed  really  millions and  trillions  of  cell  divisions, and  that's  because  we  had  high  levels of  the  enzyme  tmrase. That's  what  allowed  us  to  put  it  on. Again,  as  we  get  to  adult  tissues, they  lose  telomrase  you  have a  limited  number  of cell  divisions  before  you  get  to  this  system  here. This  is  just  $1  thing  indicating  it. So  cancer  says,  I  don't  like  that. I  want  to  be  able  to  keep proliferating  and  it  has  to  figure  out  a  way  to  do  it. So  it's  ideal,  Well, there  must  be  a  way  to actually  have  a  lot  of  cell  divisions, and  it's  like,  that  tamese  I  remember  that. If  you  mutate  you  re  express  tmse  again, cancer  you  see  is  going  back  in  time. Again,  it  doesn't  invent  something. It  just  says  it  exploits  what  is  normally  used, but  it  does  it  in  its  own  way. The  idea  of  by  re  expressing  Tomese  now. The  idea  now  the  cells  become  virtually  immortal. If  you  work  in  any  of  these  labs  and  I  used to  be  a  scientist,  so  to  speak, we  would  get  hundreds  of different  human  cell  lines  that  came  from human  tumors  that  you  grow  basically  forever. You'll  be  able  to  grow  forever  to  study  them. They  really  are  immortalized. That's  the  third  hallmark  is  this  idea, we  can  call  it  cellular  immortalization. One  of  the  main  ways, not  the  only  way  this  happens  is this  increase  in  telomerase. That  would  be  like,  we'll  still  use  I'm  old. An  endless  tank  of  gas. Those  are  the  first  three  hallmarks,  generally, given  that  car  analogy  and  it  starts  to  make sense  of  how  this could  lead  to  uncontrolled  cell  division. You've  lost  the  control  of  the  accelerator, you've  gotten  rid  of  the  brakes and  you've  circumvented  one of  the  controls  we  have  of  limiting the  number  of  cell  divisions  even  under  those  cases. That's  pretty  good.  But  we  have another  major  safeguard  that I've  just  mentioned  that  I'm  going  to  mention  again. That  is  this  thing.  The  idea  is, if  cell  becomes  too  damaged  with  some  of  these, we  have  ways  to  recognize that  with  our  main  guy  being  P  53, and  so  it  recognizes  that  if  it can't  correct  this  enough,  the  idea  is  boom. It's  going  to  initiate  or  be  one  of  the  main  pathways  to initiate  cell  suicide,  apoptosis. Another  built  in  safeguard. If  our  cells  are  becoming  too  damaged,  et  cetera, we'd  rather  get  rid  of  that  cell  than allow  it  to  acquire  other  characteristics. We  have  a  very  specific  program  of  cell  death. Again,  I  like  the  cell  death  people because  they  don't  name  things  like  P  53. They  have  death  factors  and  death  receptors. They  have  something  where is  this  guy  though  this  one  too, called  Diablo,  all  kinds  of  cool  names. They're  cool  people.  Work  for  them. We  will  do  apoptosis  probably  immediately after  the  first  term,  very  fascinating  idea. In  this  case,  go  ahead and  there  is  no  car  analogy  per  se, but  the  force  major  hallmark is  something  that's  going  to  be  contributing to  the  loss  of  the  ability  to  commit  cellular  suicide. The  loss  of  apoptosis. Again,  one  of  the  main  things, it  just  so  we  have  an  example  here  is  again, again,  I  should  write  this  the  loss of  something  like  P  53. Again,  a  major  one  that  we'll  be  looking at.  Okay.  Pretty  good. The  cell  was  doing  pretty  well. But  what  we're  going  to  see,  and  this  is  where  these are  my  favorite  hallmarks  is  that, in  fact,  I  should  have  it  coming  up. There's  some  pictures  that  we  show  of  showing  again, we're  going  to  be  dealing  with  this  later, showing  how  when  you  look  at  apoptosis, it's  a  very  orderly  way  to  get  rid  of the  cells  versus  the  crosis  in which  things  are  exploding  and  putting  toxins  out, and  so  that's  why  we  like  it. But  we'll  deal  with  that  later. Again,  and  we'll  I'll  actually  just  have  this  test, let's  say,  memorize  P  53. But  we  are  going  to  deal  with  apoptosis  and  it  is, again,  the  balance  that we're  going  to  see  with  these  different  molecules. We  have  pro  life  molecules  and  pro  death  molecules, and  they're  always  being  expressed. But  we're  having  a  balance. Again,  when  we're  looking  at  most  of our  cells  here,  they're  pro  life. But  then  they're  going  to  eventually  be programmed  to  die  and  we basically  go  but  then  they  come  back, this  again  we'll  be  getting  it. Will  be  increasing  all  those  survival  factors  and decreasing  the  death  factors  to allow  this  to  proceed  and  continue  on. A  major  safeguard  we  have. That's  why  that  P  53  becomes a  really  important  mutation  for cancers  because  it  is  a  huge  safeguard. If  you  get  rid  of  that,  now  other  characteristics, other  mutations  start  happening. One  of  the  coolest  ones  coming  up, and  this  is  where  we're  going  to  get  to  this  theme, we're  going  to  see  that  as  cancer  cells  are  growing, the  tumor  is  growing,  it's going  to  outgrow  its  blood  supply. That  blood  supply,  which  is  delivering  oxygen, taking  CO  two,  and  toxins, et  cetera,  is  really  only  meant  for  a  given  amount of  cells  because  there's  only  so  much  diffusion. Cancers  go  beyond  this. The  idea  is  if  they  don't, in  fact,  here's  a  picture. We  are  going  to  deal  with  the  angiogenesis later  after  the  test. The  idea  is,  this  is  a  picture  to  show it  that  here's  the  blood  vessel  that  this basically  is  only  able  to diffuse  a  couple  of millimeters  and  then  the  cells  start  dying. They  become  hypoxic, because  they  don't  have  enough  oxygen. So  a  cancerous  cell  say, well,  I  tried,  give  up. No,  again,  this  we'll  get  into,  they  realize, hey,  we  need  oxygen,  we  need blood  vessels  and  they  think  again,  well, there  must  be  substance  in  some  way  that blood  vessel  development  is  induced  because we  had  to  develop  a  circuitory  system,  et  cetera. These  ones  are  going  to respond  to  that  environmental  signal. The  idea  of  lower  oxygen  to actually  then  increase  signaling  molecules that  will  basically  attract the  blood  vessels  to  grow  in  and  then  we'll  look  at  this, almost  unlimited  cellular  growth. Again,  you're  getting  small  amount, but  here's  where  we're  going  to  start basically  the  cancer  cells  are  going  to  send signals  to  normal  cells  endothelial  cells to  cause  them  to  come  in. They're  starting  to  control  other  cells  in  the  body. They're  not  mutating.  They're  just going  to  go  and  produce  those  factors. Then  once  you  have  that,  you  have  this  idea  of unlimited  basically  tumor  development because  blood  vessels  are  growing in  and  also  the  idea  has  access  for  metastasis  as  well, both  of  those,  which  will  be  the  last  six  hallmark. This  was  a  cool  picture  too,  antiangiogenesis. The  idea  is,  when  you  look  at  each  one  of  these, you  start  to  see,  hey, we  see  the  mechanism  now, we  know  ways  to  our  ideas  how  to  start  countering  it. If  we've  gained  and we  have  this  stuck  acceler  we've  gained  this, what  do  we  want  to  do  with  things  like  RS? Knock  it  down. When  you  have  this  idea  that we  have  a  loss  of  things  like  P  53, what  do  we  want  to  try  to  do? Replace  P  53  or  53  function. What  do  we  want  to  do  here? Knock  down  tills. Those  are  basically  in  development. What  do  we  want  to  do  here? A  replace,  increase  the  likelihood  of  apitosis. Figure  out  how  to  do  that.  We're  going to  talk  about  a  lot  of  ways  here, why  this  was  the  idea  too,  we'll  cover. The  idea  once  you  figured  out  it's the  blood  vessels  that  are  really  important, normal  cells  that  not  only  can  we  attack  the  tumor, we  can  basically  have  anti  angiogenic  to  shrink  out, basically  kill  the  food  supply  of  the  cancer, basically,  going  the  opposite. If  you  didn't  understand  the  angiogenesis, which  for  most  of  the  last  century, you  didn't,  we  didn't  have  that. Once  we  started  to  understand, hey,  that's  really  important, we  develop  these  anti angiogenic  treatments  that  we'll  talk  about. So  we'll  put  that  up  here. Angiogenesis.  Again,  just  put discode  I  can't  write  it  all  for  words, but  it's  the  gain  of  this  blood  supply. Probably  the  only  one  which  I want  to  remember  now  just  to  have  an  example  of  one, although  we'll  go  into  detail. Here's  this  idea  again  sorry, of  this  balance  now balance  of  pliferative,  non  proliferative, basically,  when  we  look at  that  of  death  versus  not  death. Here's  the  idea  of  angiogenesis. We  have  things  which  activated  and  Sorry, increase  the  likelihood  and inhibitors  that  are  naturally produced  at  different  levels. Again,  normally  now  we  have  inhibitors  winning. But  again,  if  we  need  to  replace cells  or  we  look  at  female  menstrual,  psycho, et  cetera,  we  have  to  temporarily  go the  other  direction,  but  then  go  back. Again,  in  this  case,  cancer  cells  are  going to  get  us  basically  it's  called  the  androgenic  switch. They're  going  to  get  us  stuck  on  one  way. The  biggest  thing  to  remember  now just  for  one  that  we'll  talk  about  is this  increase  one  of  these  activators  Vega. That's  probably  the  main  thing  that  we'll talk  about  that's  associated  with  this  angiogenesis, this  huge  amount  of  basically  cancer  cells releasing  VGF  and  basically that  induces  the  blood  vessels  to  grow. What  do  you  think  antiangiogenic  therapy  involves? Knocking  down  veg  F. The  last  of  these  traditional  hallmarks, which  we'll  put  it  here  comes  the  big  killer  here. Where  most  cancer  deaths  occur, is  it  from  the  primary  tumor? Metastasis.  This  is  where,  let's  go  on. This  is  this  idea  too  of  this  used  to  be a  liver  and  basically  it's  been taken  over  by  metastatic  cancer  cells. There  are  some  fun  videos  and  we  are  going  to  deal  with metastasis  as  well.  This  is  this  idea And  I  already  have  those  stats. Without  memorizing  this  now, we're  going  to  see  that  this  is going  to  be  what  we're  going  to  call  cascade. There  are  many  different  events  and mutations  and  changes  that  have  to  happen for  this  normal  the  cancer  cells from  the  tumor  to  invade  the  tissue, invade  the  blood  system, survive  in  the  blood  system, get  out  of  the  blood  back  into  the  new  tissue, and  then  have  the  correct  or create  the  correct  environment  to  grow  again. This  will  be  the  metastic  cascade. This  is  very  interesting, one  of  the  hallmarks  we'll  do  in  the  second  half  too, of  how  this  acquires  all  these  characteristics. We're  going  to  see  as  we  get  to  that too,  it  doesn't  do  it  alone. It  controls  all  the  other  cells  around  it, creates  a  different  micro  environment. Again,  has  the  immune  cells  do  its  work, fibrolas  do  its  work,  endothelial  cells, it  starts  controlling  all  the  other  cells  in  the  body  to do  that  because  by  then  it  knows  the  signals. Again,  all  of  our  normal  cells are  meant  to  and  do  just respond  to  signals  to  go  one  way  or  the  other. Once  they  have  control  of  that, they  know  how  to  command  all  the  other  cells  and  they  do. We'll  just  put  that  basically metastasis  we  make  it someplace  spread  to  distant  sites just  to  have  something  to  write. If  I  want  to  just  put  so  we  have  an  example  of  each, the  idea,  which  we  will  deal  with  again, these  in  great  detail  later, it's  going  to  be  the  loss  of  something  called Eicheru  Because  as  these  cells are  normally  in  normal  tissues, attached  to  one  another,  to  form  a  tissue, not  only  is  it  a  glue, it  is  sending  signals  to  these  cells,  saying, your  job  is  to  do whatever  your  tissue  is  to  not  proliferate. If  you  lose  that  connection,  fact, I  don't  put  that  other  picture here.  Look  at  this  guy  here. If  you  lose  that  connection because  here's  some  of  the  signaling  of  that, the  cell  now  is  no  longer  being controlled  to  not  proliferate and  proliferation  can  start  happening. That's  why  one  of  the  few  first  mutations in  metastasis  is the  detachment  of  these  cells from  the  actual  tumor  itself  so  it  can  proceed  on. So  those  are  the  six  traditional, if  you  look  at  the  original  paper, it  goes  into  details  of  that. Those  are  the  six  traditional  hallmarks  of  cancer. Again,  first  test, starting  basically  as  we get  to  next  week  and  the  week  after, we're  going  to  be  dealing  with  these  in  detail, giving  just  more  details, especially  when  we  get  to  the  therapeutics. Again,  we  won't  do  cell  Immortalization. When  I  teach  Bin  100, when  they  let  me,  I  actually  do  a  lot  more  on  that. Then  in  the  second  half, we're  definitely  going  to  be  starting  with  apoptosis. Angiogenesis,  and  metastasis,  for  sure. Any  questions  now  about  these  six  hallmarks? Yes.  I  have  a  question  angiogenic  Yes. That's  for  all  these  therapies. If  you  have  anti  RS,  isn't  RAS  a  normal  functioning? That  becomes  the  trick,  so  to  speak, and  the  idea  of  dealing  with side  effects  of  the  drugs  because  it  can. Now,  the  good  things  we'll  see  are that  angiogenic  vessels  that  are  being induced  are  different  than  normal  vessels. And  so  you  can  have  some  of  these  treatments  in which  primarily  the  drugs  will  affect  those. But  when  you  look  at  right  now  in  our  adult  body, again,  wound  healing  does  require  angiogenesis. When  you  look  at  the  menstrual  cycle,  definitely  does, and  also  when  you  think  about  pregnancy, in  which  you're  supplying and  have  the  baby  developing  one. If  you  are  on  those  drugs  and  we'll talk  about  that  some  of  the  other  ones  that  were  used, it  actually  can  cause  birth defects  and  cause  damages  there. That  is  the  idea  and  all  of these  therapies,  that's  what  we  get  to. That's  why  it's  a  good  point. A  lot  of  these  therapeutics, are  they  specifically  directed  at  cancer  cell  or  can  they affect  all  these  other  cells that  have  these  various  functions? The  answer  is  a  lot  of  times  they  are. Wouldn't  it  be  nice  to  figure  out  ways to  just  target  cancer  cells  with  these  therapeutics? Look  at  cancer  markers. Look  at  these  things  that  will  do  that versus  just  putting  all  this  out. The  answer  is  yes.  Are  we  developing  that? Yeah.  Now,  could  it  go a  lot  faster  if  we  weren't  just  put 0.1%  of  our  budget  in  yeah,  probably  good. But  this  is  the  idea,  and this  is  why  I  like  that  thinking because  I  really  want  you  to  come  out  of this  understanding  of  this. But  also,  let's  say  you're even  going  to  a  lab  or  et  cetera, you  want  to  have  all  those  in  consideration. What  you're  knocking  out.  But  how specific  can  you  make  it? How  can  you  minimize their  effects  upon  normal  cells  and  tissue? That's  what's  been  lacking  with basic  chemotherapy  and even  radiation  therapy  up  until  now, and  we're  getting  a  little  better  at  it. Then  you  see  the  paper  coming  out. All  those  papers  are  there,  but we  don't  have  to  read  them  totally, which  they  call  it  the  next  generation  by  some  of the  same  authors  and  going  to  make  this  simpler  here. But  when  it  comes  down  to  it. So  then  we  can  add  up  to  basically  four more  that  some  of  them  we're  going  to be  talking  about  race. So  we  kind  of  do  seven,  eight,  nine,  ten. And  we're  going  to  talk  about  these. Now,  again,  we're  not  going  to define  when  I'm  thinking  about  this, I'm  not  going  to  which  one  are  just called  emerging  and  which  one  are  called  enabling. We  just  want  to  put  these  ten  characteristics  together. Okay?  These  are  again, you  can  see,  they  become  really  important. So  the  Warburg  effect, I  want  to  actually  sort  of  are  a  little  more  complicated. But  basically,  I  guess  I  can  put  this  up  here  too. These  are  important,  by  the  way. And  so  again,  we'll  just  put loss  of  how  to  put  with  their  words. So  again,  all  the  other  control  mechanisms that  basically  limit  mutations  from  happening, a  lot  of  them  you  probably  have  had  in  your  lecular, those  are  going  to  be  broken  too. DNA  repair  enzymes. A  lot  of  mutations  including, that's  what  Boca,  the  breast  cancer  ones are  associated  with  what  they  are. If  you  start  losing  DNA  repair  enzymes, that  obviously  is  going  to  increase your  chance  of  acquiring  mutations. And  so  those  are  important  ones  for  sure. Then  the  other  one  I  want to  put  before  I  don't  want  to  do the  Warburfect  right  now because  I  want  to  get  these  other  ones. The  idea  of  let's  look  at  that  one, this  will  be  what  we  cover. So  basically,  you  know, the  I  just  put immune  system.  Evasion. This  one,  we're  going  to cover  as  much  detail as  you  can  do  in  the  ten  week  course. This  is  really  cool. This  is  one  I've  only  started  doing last  few  years  after I  don't  know  how  many  years  I've  been  doing  this, but  the  idea  of  cancer  cells. Do  our  immune  system  detect some  of  these  abnormal  cancer  cells? Sure.  But  what  happens  is  this. The  idea  is  they  start  and  has  some, the  cancer  cells  start  to  figure  out ways  to  escape  that,  avoid  immune  detection. Not  only  that,  but  as  I  started  to  mention  last  time, not  only  that,  but  they  decide, Hey,  you  guys  have  some  function  for  me. I'm  going  to  either  avoid  detection and  I'm  going  to  start  if  you  start  getting  tissue, I'm  going  to  start  controlling you  to  do  what  I  want  and  then  I'll  kill  you. Okay?  It's  completely  opposite. It's  like  I  have  my  slides. Don't  kill  me,  I'll  kill  you, so  I  show  the  mechanisms. And  so  it's  fascinating,  right? And  the  idea  is,  but  again,  what  does  that  mean  for  us? If  basically  the  cancer  cells  have  now taken  over  our  immune  system or  avata,  what  are  we  going  to  do? Immunotherapy,  which  is  really  big  right  now. Your  best  fighter  is  your  own  immune  system. If  we  can  just  boost  your  immune  system, then  we  have  that  specificity potentially  involved,  more  specific. You  have  this  idea  of  really  a  major  thing which  is  happening  now  and  some  of the  best  therapeutics  that  are  being  developed, working  with  those  are  these  immunotherapeutics. We  figured  out  cancer  avoids the  immune  system  and  starts  controlling  that. We  boost  up  our  immune  system  to  better recognize  the  cancer  cells  and  kill  it. Many  people  have  heard  of  car  T  cells,  things  like  that. We  actually  make  our  own  immune  cells to  make  them  even  better  to  put  in  back, et  cetera,  all  kinds  of  stuff  going  on  there. Again,  immunology, how  many  people  have  had  immunology  here. I  bow  down  to  you. Immunology,  for  me  is  really  tough. There's  so  many  names,  in  nomenclature. Mine  will  be  just  a  very  abbreviated  weak  basics  of  it. Okay.  So  that's  all  you  have  to  write  for  eight. Let's  go  ahead  and  do,  you  know, the  tumor,  you  know,  the  inflammatory. And  basically,  I'll  just  put, you  know,  increased  inflammatory  response or,  you  know,  activation. Really?  It's  an  increase  in  inflammation. And  I  think  I'll  put  I  might  have  sort  of  a  slide. Do  I  have  a  slide  just  for  that  after  that? Yeah,  I'll  just  put  this  up  here  for that  and  then  I'll  do  the  Walberg  effet. Not  that  you're  memorizing  this  now, but  this  is  this  idea  of  try  to  illustrate  this  idea, do  I  have  a  slide  right  before? Put  the  slide  right  up  here. Slide  I  show  the  first  day,  again, when  you  look  at  tissue,  even  in  tumors, you  have  all  these  other  cells, you  have  endothelial  cells. Here's  fibroblasts. You  can  see  in  this  cage  they're called  cancer  associated  fibroblasts. We're  going  to  have  immune  cells coming  in  as  well  and  just  other  cells. This  is  this  idea  how these  are  going  to  be  starting  to  be  controlled. If  you  look  at  the  inflammatory  response, you  can  actually  see  here's  inflammatory  cells, the  fibroblast,  et  cetera, how  the  cancer  cells  now  are  controlling  this so  that  when  you  have  inflammatory  response  or  infection, a  lot  of  these  molecules  are upregulated  and  basically  they  start  using that  and  then  they  start  using these  other  cells  to  make more  of  those  inflammatory  molecules. It  starts  controlling  because  again, those  molecules  which  are used  for  inflammation  are  used  by these  cancer  cells  to increase  these  other  characteristics. You  start  to  really  see  how cancer  cell  now  is  not  alone,  it's  taking  over, creating  a  perfect  micro  environment  to  do all  that  at  once  by  utilizing  all  of  these  other  cells. That's  just  that  you understand  inflammation  and  the  use  of  that. We'll  put  this  in  context  with these  later  are  really  important. The  last  one  of  these,  let's  just  put  Warburg  effects. This  one,  I  have  a  couple  of slides  and  I  want  to  put  this on  to  illustrate  it.  How  many  years  now? For  a  century  and  a  half, this  Warburg  basically  talked  about, so  I  have  to  go  back  to  this,  right. I  have  a  couple  of  things  on  this. Start  talking  about  that.  Metabolism  of cancer  cells  are  really important  and  they're  different  than  normal  cells. You  call  that  a  Warburg  effect and  what  the  Warburg  effect is  is  I'll  look  up  here, but  illustrate  this  on  this  case,  just  look  at  this  way. You  look  at  normal  cells, you've  had  these  ideas  before  too. Normal  cells  under  different  conditions  of  oxygen, we  utilize  energy  slightly  different. If  you  have  these  anteropa  conditions, low  oxygen,  You're  going to  shun  a  lot  of  this  energy  through  glycolysis. We  all  know  the  details  of  why  you  do  that, you  produce  some  ATP. You  are  going  to  produce  a  lot  of  lactate that  eventually  you  get  taken  care  of. Under  high  oxygen,  we're  going  to basically,  it's  not  100%, but  you're  going  to  put  a  lot  of  the  energy,  sugar, et  cetera  into  oxidative  phosphorylation. I  didn't  want  to  write  all  out. But  going  through  the  whole Kreb  cycle  electron  transport  chain, you  produced  a  lot  of  ATP, anaerobic  glycolysis, aerobic  obviously  more  of  this  normal  phosphorylation. Here  is  the  Warburg  effect, sometimes  called  aerobic  glycolysis. Again,  not  all  cells  are  going  to  do  the  cancer. But  what  they're  going  to  do  is  under  even  high  oxygen, this  sugar  energy  coming  in, they're  still  going  to  divert  a  lot  of that  to  the  glycolytic  pathway  to  produce  lactate. So  you  can  see  the  difference  when  you're looking  at  the  Warburg  effect  between  these  two. The  idea  is,  again,  high  oxygen  normal  cells, normally  phosphorylation. But  even  under  aerobic  conditions,  cancer  cells, there's  a  lot  of  them  will  basically shunt  that  energy  to  glycolysis. Again,  it  has  ways to  part  of  it  will  still  go to  oxidative  and  it's  got  other  ways  to  make  energy. But  the  whole  key  is  this,  converting a  lot  to  glycolysis  to  produce lactate  and  the  simple without  going  to  the  details  of  that. These  are  just  the  slides  up  here, I  think  I  have  two  slides  on  that. Why  make  lactate? Because  you're  going  to  be  making a  lot  of  cells,  proliferation. They  need  a  lot  of  components. Lactate  and  some  of  these  other  glycolytic  intermediates basically  are  great  for anabolic  processes  to  make  components  for  new  cells. Sometimes  I  think  another  way is  biomass,  to  make  proliferation. So  that's  one  thing  that cancer  is  doing  for  metabolically, exploiting  this  idea  of  using  even  high  oxygen. A  lot  of  this,  that's  why  I  called  aerobic  glycolysis, through  gycolysis  to  produce  lactate. Again,  if  you  go  to  look  at  these  papers, you  see  how  lactate  and  some  of  these  other  intermediates are  used  to  synthesize  different  components. Now,  if  you  think  that's  fascinating. Apparently,  she  doesn't,  but  have  a  good  day. I'll  see  you.  This  one. Relatively  this  is  cool  because  this  is  showing  again, how  cancer  cells  are  going  to exploit  and  create  a  different  macro  environment. Let's  exploit  normal  cells. This  is  called  the  reverse  Warburg  effect. What  it's  basically  saying  is  we're  going  to  have a  cancer  cell  basically  produce  different  signals, things  these  are  reactive  oxygen  types of  signals  that  are  caused normal  cells  to  basically even  under  oxidative  conditions, so  really  we're  looking  at  this  too. Signals  are  going  to  go  out  even under  oxidative  conditions. It's  going  to  basically  cause  these  cells  to  go through  the  glycolytic  pathway  to  produce  lactate. Lactate  then  gets  imported  by  the  cancer  cells, so  it  can  do  its  little  biomass  thing  too. Reverse  warbic  effect. It's  literally  using  these  other  cells basically  making  them  to  go  through  glycolysis. These  are  normal  cells  that now  produce  the  intermediates  they  need. So  you  start  to  see  how  cells now  are  controlling  normal  cells, normal  tissue  to  basically help  them  achieve  what  they  want. It's  called  the  reverse  Warburg  effect. I  like  putting  it  in  now  because  again, you  really  even  at  this  second  day  of  lecture, really  start  to  see  how  cancer  cells  do  not  work  alone. They  are  exploiting  other  cells. That's  why  although  you  don't  have  to know  the  name  of  this  now, these  are  called  cancer  associated  fibroblasts because  now  they're  taking  the  normal  fibroblast. They  are  theirs  now,  and  that's  why  we'll  talk  about. They're  going  to  control  those  as  we  deal. You  don't  have  to  know  CIF  right  now, but  I  do  want  to  understand, at  least  at  this  level,  the  Warburg effect  and  the  reverse  Warburg  effect  you  get. Again,  this  is  relatively  new. I  don't  know  how  to  say  this as  far  as  years  go  because  I'm  getting  old. When  I  say  relatively  new,  I  don't  mean  last  year, I  probably  mean  the  last  couple  of  decades. But  the  idea  is,  when  you look  at  another  way  of  cancer  treatment, it  is  this  idea  of  what  if  we block  parts  of  the  glyclin  pathway. Block  the  production  of  lactate. May  that  be  a  treatment  for  cancer  to  decrease  it? Yeah.  You  decrease  this  idea of  its  ability  to  produce  lactate, which  is  relying  on,  it's  going  to  potentially decrease,  cancer  cell  growth. The  changes  again, the  cancer  cells  have  changed  their  metabolism, so  you  basically  attack  that  level  of  it. Again,  trying  not  to  affect other  cells  that  actually  needed,  et  cetera  like  that. That's  always  the  side  effect. So  those  are  the  ten  things I  want  us  to  know  as  far  as  hallmarks. Again,  some  of  these,  as  I've  said, are  going  to  be  dealt  with  quite  a  bit  later  in the  course  and  starting  definitely  next  week  as  well. Any  questions  about  that?  Is  still  pretty  cool? Yes.  Well,  this  is  the  thing, this  is  this  idea  of  heterogeneity  too. First  of  all,  and  I  think  one  of the  pictures  probably  show  it  because  I  wanted  to make  this  a  little  simpler. See  if  it  does,  it  doesn't  show  it  in  this  one. Does  it  show  in  the  other  on  this. First  of  all,  it's  a  percentage. Part  of  it's  going  in.  Also  even  from  this, we  start  to  see  there's microhterogenty  within  this  as  well. So  cells  might  be producing  more  biomass  and  getting  some, others  are  going  to  be producing  more  energy  and  then  using  other  cells. They  definitely  get  enough  energy  as  well. Yeah. But  again,  yeah,  yeah,  within  that, for  sure,  within  the  glycolytic  pathway. Every  time  you  can't  produce  more  on  that, but  of  course,  you're  going  at  high  levels  of  it. But  also,  as  shown  from  this  in  other  ways, you  are  going  to  be  shunting  some  of the  energy  through  the  oxidative  pathway  as  well. Again,  is  when  this  is  turned  on, does  it  stay  on  like  this  100%? No.  You  might  be  going  85%  and  then  a little  bit  later  now  you're  going to  change  its  metabolism  and  produce  more  energy. So  it's  not  a  static  thing  as  well. It's  dynamic  process  as  well. Cancer  is  crazy. Wow.  I  get  to  get  behind. I  get  so  excited.  I'm  going  to  draw  this  next  time. We're  going  to  do  cell  signaling  next  time. That's  the  next  PowerPoint  and get  through  a  lot  of  it  to  get  ready  for  oncogenes. We'll  catch  up  on  things. But  this  is  a  good  first  week anyway  to  get  it.  Yes,  before  you  leave. Okay. Because  it's  only  going to  do  it  because  the  cancer  cells  are sending  signals  to  it  to basically  convert  basically  tell  it  what  to  do. Instead  of  doing  what  it  normally  does, it's  literally  inducing  to  go  through  glycolysis. These  signals  basically  under  this. Well,  just  change  the  metabolism  of  this  and literally  induce  glycolysis  in  those  cells. That's  how  to  respond  to  these  signals  going  in. No,  when  you  start  signaling  reactive  action  species, it's  basically  going  to  signal  the  cells  to  go through  a  DNA  damage  response  type  of  thing, and  part  of  that  is  shunting  with  energy  and  glycosi. No,  no,  no.  Well,  of  course, I'm  not  giving  the  details.  That's  why  it's  hard. But  there's  different  signals, including  this  idea  of  inducing, you  know,  these,  you  know, free  radicals  and  things  like  that  in  these  cells. Basically,  almost  causing  damage to  the  cells  or  these  signals. That  signals  the  cell to  go  through  different  metabolism,  right? To  actually  respond  to these  these  basically  almost  carcinogens,  DNA  damaging. And  part  of  that  then  just  causes it  to  shunk  this  tube  glyncoa. Trying  to,  increase  those  enzyme  glencoss decrease  the  enzymes  involved  in  roba. I  still  It's  allowing  this  to  do  normal. This  is  the  cancer  cell.  The  cancer  cells  now  can  take instead  of  shunting  their  energy  not  producing  much  ATP, shunting  their  energy  to  produce  lactate. And  that's  what  they  were  talking  about, do  we  have  enough  ATP? These  cells  say,  I'm  going to  go  this  direction  just  like  I  would  normally, oxygen  going  through  oxidate  phos  fororlation. But  I  still  need  lactate  because  I  need  biomass. It  says,  I'm  going  to  do  this,  but  I'm  going  to  signal these  other  cells  which  should  go  through this  to  go  through  the  to  produce  lactate and  then  export  and  import that  lactate  until  it  can  do  its  job. More  advanced  mechanism  than What  do  you  mean  by  advanced? At  the  same  time  late  process? Well,  that's  a  good  question. I  don't  know  if  it's  a  progression of  Norm  Marburg  and  then  that. In  general,  I  would  say  because cancer  cells  start  working on  their  own  and  as  they  develop, that's  when  they  have  more  these  characteristics of  controlling  other  cells. But  I  don't  have  an  answer  is it  exact  timing  event  of  it  as  well, or,  you  know,  can  this  start  occurring  earlier  on? That's  where  I  simply  don't  know. If  you  look  more  up  on  it,  you  might  know. Joe,  I  have  a  limited  amount of  knowledge  on  the  Warb  effect,  to  be  honest. That's  kind  of  putting  this.  But  I haven't  delved  deeply  into  that. That  might  answer  those  questions. Reverse.  Yeah,  that's  what I'm  coming  as  I  don't  really  know. I  haven't  read  enough, especially  this  is  relatively  new. I  don't  have  enough  details  of the  actual  science  to  know  to  answer  that  question, is  it  different  in  different  cancer  types, different  things  like  that. I  don't  really  know.  But  again, in  general,  from  what  I've  learned  on  this  stuff, this  idea  of  controlling  other  cells is  further  down  in the  list  of  development  of  characteristics. Cancer  cells  work  alone  for  a  while  and  then start  developing  signals  in  general for  controlling  other  cells,  which  is  doing  here. But  details  of  that  and differences  between  micro  environments, so  the  tumor  and  timing,  different  cancers, that's  where  you  come  up  with a  lot  of  research  I  just  haven't  done. Sure. Antigens is  high  blood  pressure would  increase  the  chance  of  getting  cancer. I  haven't  heard  high  blood  pressure  per  se. But  as  far  as  because  you're  talking  about  pressure, you  know,  But  it  just depends  upon  what  is happening  actually  the  cancer  cells  themselves. Does  that  increase  I  don't  think high  blood  pressure  increases the  formation  of  new  blood  vessels. But  it  is  going  to  do  I  bet  we  can  look  at some  signals  that  are  going  to  be presented  that  the  cancer  cell  will  be  able  to  exploit. But  I  can't  see  that  I could  be  wrong,  when  you  look  at  that, but  I  haven't  found  that  association  directly. Cancer  cells  to  turn  on the  androgenic  switch  to  counter  apoptosis. Well,  that's  a,  to counter  dying  from  the  lack  of  oxygen,  which  is, they  will  send  VEGF  and  command all  these  other  cells  to  send  VGF  to these  endothelia  cells  and  that's  what  is  the  major  one that  just  normally  induces  blood  vessel  growth. Whey  experience  a  strain  in  oxygen  supply, they  also  release  Exactly. Cancer  just  exploits  normal  molecules. That's  just  a  normal  process. It  just  like,  Well,  now  we're  going  to  throw this  much  at  it  and  actually  have  all  the  other  cells. We're  going  to  flood  it  instead  of  a  normal  again, normal  spatial  temporal  production  of  these  things  for wound  healing  or  early  development or  you're  producing  the  right  amount  and  turning  it  off. Here,  boom,  they  just  exploit  it  and massively  produce  and  actually get  rid  of  the  inhibitors  as  well. They  do  it  the  signals  to  these  endothelio  cells, normal  cells  are  very,  very  high. They  don't  change  any  of these  normal  cells  into  cancer  cells. They  are  genetically  stable. They  just  exploit  what  these  cells  can do  by  just  knowing  the  signals, sending  out  the  signals, having  these  cells  send  out  more  signals, you  can  see  it  just  goes
